Hey they're welcome to another session of limitless calculus.
I promise you this is going to be a short one.
I just want to go over a very important concept called critical points.
Let's jump right into the definition.
All right so critical points there are points for which the derivative of f of x is zero or undefined.
So for something to be a critical point of f of x either the derivative at that point is zero or is
undefined.
So let's go over an example.
All right.
So for example number one let's say that we have a function f of x and its derivative is
x.
So we're finding out the critical points of f of x.
So we need to make sure that we find the numbers so that this derivative is either 0 or undefined.
Now for the undefined case that's only when you have a fraction.
In this case we don't have a fraction.
So all we need to do is find the numbers that make the derivative equal to zero.
So when does 3 x equal 0.
While you're multiplying three times x.
So the only way for 3 x to be zero is when X itself is zero.
Right.
Because that's going to give you half of zero equals three times zero.
Equals zero.
All right.
So there is a critical point when X equals zero.
Let's do another example.
Let's say that the derivative of another function is
three over X minus five.
So again we want to find the critical points for the original f of x.
So we have to find the values that make the derivative equals zero and the ones that make it undefined.
In this case this derivative can never be equal to zero because remember for something to be equal to
zero it needs to be zero on the top.
However this top is always 3.
So we don't have to check for this derivative being equal to zero.
On the other hand this derivative could be undefined because it has a denominator.
It has a bottom and what is the bottom equal to zero.
Well as.
Find out.
So we grab the bottom part and we say X minus five equals zero.
And what we'll do is we'll solve for x.
So we need to bring this negative five to the other side.
So we'll do plus five on both sides
or bring down the x negative five plus five cancels out.
Bring down the equals and 5.
All right so according to this if we plug in 5 into this derivative we're going to get undefined.
Let's test that out.
And prime 5 equals 3 over and again we're plugging in five.
So it's going to be 5 minus 5 is 0 3 over 0 is undefined.
So that is true.
This means that there is a critical point when X equals 5.
All right let's do one more example.
So in the first case there's a critical point because a derivative equals zero.
And the second case there's a critical point because a derivative is undefined.
Let's see a case where the derivative can both be zero and undefined.
So let's say that the derivative of a function is given by this
OK.
So this is a derivative of f of x and we're trying to find the critical points of f of x.
So again for critical points we always check for two things.
Number one the numbers that make the derivative equal to zero and that numbers that make it undefined.
So here we have a fraction and we have access on both the top and the bottom.
So first we're going to check for the numbers that make the derivative equal to zero.
And remember that for a derivative to be equal to zero the top needs to be equal to zero.
OK.
So let's go ahead and grab the top so we have X times X minus 1
is equal to zero.
And I mean if you're going to look at it there are two ways this can be equal to zero.
So we have X times X minus 1.
You have a multiplication and you have two things that are multiplying this X and X minus 1.
Remember that if two things are multiplying and one of them is 0 then the whole thing is zero.
So either this can be 0 this X or this X Minus One can be zero.
So our first answer is obviously when X equals zero because this outside X is going to be 0 0 times.
Something else is going to be zero.
OK so we're going to start building our answer.
I'll put it down here.
So there is a critical point when X equals zero.
Because of this x by itself.
OK where else is this going to be equal to zero.
Well let's look inside the parentheses.
One is the parentheses going to be equal to zero.
If you have X minus one.
Well obviously if you plug in one you're going to have what you're going to have one minus one minus
one is zero.
So you're going to have a zero in the parentheses.
Therefore there's also a critical point when X equals 1.
All right so we plug in zero.
The whole thing is zero.
If we plug in one the whole thing is 0 as well.
So we have two values that make the derivative equal to zero.
Now let's find out what the derivative is undefined.
Remember it's undefined when the bottom is equal to zero.
So let's grab the bottom x minus 3 equals zero.
We'll set it equal to zero and we'll solve for x x minus 3.
And we do plus three on both sides to bring the three to the other side.
So we bring down the X again negative three plus three goes away.
And we have zero plus three which is three.
So according to this if we plug in 3 into our derivative that's going to give us undefined.
And that's actually the case because if you do prime of three you're going to end up plugging in a three
on the bottom.
So that's three minus three equals zero.
So our third answer here is when X equals 3.
All right so you have critical points for all these x values when actually go 0 when it actually goes
1 and when X equals 3.
Let's make a quick distinction between critical points and critical numbers.
So when you hear the word point remember that you have an x in A Y.
Right.
You have an x value y value.
And number is just you know just a number.
So a critical number
is a number that either makes the derivative equal to zero or undefined.
So it's the x value by itself
that makes a derivative equals zero or undefined
that is what a critical number is.
All right.
So what we actually found on the last examples were the critical numbers.
They are the values that make the derivative equal to zero or undefined.
A point however is composed of an X on a y.
So this x value of the critical points is the critical number.
All right and let's do one more example so we can see how everything works together.
So let's say that we have the function 3 x squared minus 12 X and we want to find the critical points
for this function.
So first of all we find the derivative and it's going to be 6 x minus 12.
Again we're just using the rules for derivatives.
So at this point you should know that you have a constant so that goes outside you bring down your dictator.
You keep the exponent of 1 and you have the differential.
So it's a minus.
And then here you have the constant multiple You have 12 and the X becomes X to the one minus 1.
So that's X to the 0 and it goes away.
All right so here we have our derivative.
So again to find the critical points we need to find values that make the derivative either zero or
undefined.
In this case there's no undefined because there is no bottom.
So we're just going to set it equal to zero.
And let's go ahead and solve for x.
So first of all we move this 12 to the other side.
So we have 6 x equals to 12 and then we divide by 6 from both sides.
And that is going to give us 6 over 6 goes away X equals 12 over 6 which is equal to 2.
So this x value is a critical number.
All right we said critical numbers are the numbers that make derivative equal zero or undefined to get
the actual critical points.
We need to grab this critical number and plug it in where.
Well you might think oh of course it has to be plugged into the derivative but that is not the case.
Remember Actually that if you just plug this into the derivative you're going to get a zero right because
by definition this too is a number that makes a derivative equal to zero.
So to get the actual point you're going to have to plug in this to into the original function.
And if you think about it that makes sense we're trying to find the critical points of the original
function.
So if you have an x value you just need to go ahead and plug it into the original and find the y value
corresponding to that x value.
So we're going to say to because we're plugging in our two into our original function.
So we have three and then it's two squared.
Mine is 12 times to.
So two squared is four times three is 12
minus 12 times two is 24.
So we have 12 minutes 24 is negative 12 so we have a Y value for this x value.
That means that our critical point our call it C.P. is at 2 negative 12
and that is your answer.
All right.
Just wanted to make this distinction between critical number and critical point critical number is the
x value.
Critical point is both the x value and the corresponding y value.
And remember that once you get a critical point you're just going to go ahead and plug it into the original
function and that's going to give you the corresponding y value.
At that moment you'll have your point which is your critical point and again a very easy way to remember
to plug this into the original.
Is that actually if you try plugging it in into your derivative it's either going to give you zero or
undefined because by definition the critical number is that the value that makes the derivative equal
to zero or undefined.
So again you describe this to plug it into the original get your final critical points and you are good
to go.
My friend let's go into our summary.
All right so going into our summary we have the critical points of f of x occur when the derivative
equals zero or as undefined.
So we have these two checks.
Do not forget derivative equals zero or a derivative is undefined.
So in general you always check for the derivative being equal to zero.
So you set it equal to zero and you solve for x.
But for the other check the undefine one that can only happen when there's a fraction.
So if your derivative is a fraction then the top part corresponds to the derivative being equal to zero.
And the bottom part corresponds to it being undefined.
So for example if you have a over B
then this top part corresponds to the derivative being equal to zero.
And the bottom part corresponds to the undefined part.
So if this could be zero on top you have to look for the values that make it zero on top.
If it can be a zero on the bottom then you have to look for the values that make zero on the bottom
as well.
Because remember we have two checks.
One is for the top one is for the bottom.
If you don't have a fraction only check for a derivative being equal to zero because it can never be
undefined.
All right.
So the values that make the derivative equal to zero or undefined are called the credit card numbers.
I remember a number is just a number.
On the other hand to find the actual critical points you need to plug in your critical numbers into
the original function.
This is very important.
So if you're asked to find the critical points you can't just say oh the critical point is X equals
1.
That is not a point for a point.
You need both the X and the y value.
That is a point.
So again once you have your critical numbers all of your axes then what you do is you plug them into
the original function.
And like I said it makes sense because if you plug them back into the derivative you're either going
to get zero or you're going to get on the fines.
In other words division by zero.
So that is it for critical points.
I wanted to do a separate section for this because you're going to see them a lot and I don't know if
you noticed but if you did the last tutorial which wasn't increasing and decreasing functions we actually
find the critical points in order to find increasing and decreasing intervals.
Remember that we did you know we need to find the x values that make the derivative equal to zero or
undefined.
Well those are critical points.
So you've already done them.
If you did that section.
All right well I have a couple of examples for you to try out critical points.
So I'll see you in the next tutorial.